How the pipeline goes from reads to gene families
=================================================

What each stage produces
------------------------
  read            a nucleotide sequence with one alignment to the genome (chromosome, start
                  position, CIGAR).
  exon            a genomic range (chromosome, start, end), read off the CIGAR.
  intron chain    an ordered list of (donor, acceptor) coordinate pairs. A key used to group reads,
                  not a sequence.
  candidate       a group of reads sharing one intron chain, or for unspliced reads a group with
                  overlapping spans, plus an extent (chromosome, start, end) and a read count.
  exon-sum        nucleotides: the reference bases at the candidate's exon ranges, concatenated.
                  The reads supply the coordinates, the genome supplies the bases. Read sequences
                  are not used after this point.
  locus           one elected candidate, carrying a range (chromosome, start, end, strand), its
                  exon-sum sequence, and the pooled read support.
  homology edge   a relation between two loci, decided by aligning their exon-sums. Position is not
                  used.
  graph           nodes are loci, edges are homology edges.
  component       a maximal set of loci reachable from one another by chains of edges.
  family          a component, split where it is too sparse, with co-located loci merged, kept only
                  if at least 2 distinct loci remain.

Stages 1 to 3 work in coordinates; the exon-sum converts coordinates back into nucleotides. Position
is not consulted again until the co-located merge in step 7.

1. Reads to exons
-----------------
Primary alignments only (samtools -F 2308: no unmapped, secondary or supplementary records). An N in
the CIGAR is a spliced-out intron, and the blocks between the N operations are the exons. A D is a
deletion, not an intron, and does not split an exon.

2. Reads to candidate transcripts
---------------------------------
Two rules, applied separately.

Spliced reads: two reads belong to the same candidate if their intron lists are identical, junction
for junction, where a junction is the exact triple (chromosome, donor, acceptor).

Unspliced reads are excluded from that rule, because an empty intron list would pool them
chromosome-wide. They are clustered separately, per chromosome, by single-linkage span overlap with
no threshold: any overlap links. This rule produces the single-exon candidates.

A chain needs at least 2 reads to form a candidate at all. A candidate is then kept if at least 2
reads support it, and that count is pooled over the locus rather than counted per candidate: support
is summed across the connected component of the junction-incidence graph, in which two candidates
are adjacent if they share an exact junction. The two floors are equal, so the pooled test does not
currently reject a candidate that formed. The pooling rule is what allows the floor to be raised
without discarding fragmented loci, where the reads at one locus split across many chains and no
single chain reaches the floor alone.

A candidate's start is the 2nd smallest read start and its end is the 2nd largest read end, so a
single read cannot extend it. The trimming is per candidate, so two candidates that later join the
same locus can have different extents. One locus yields many candidates.

3. Candidate transcript to exon-sum
-----------------------------------
Take the reference bases at the read-derived exon coordinates and concatenate them.

Every junction must be canonical and all junctions must agree on strand, or the candidate is
dropped. Canonical means GT..AG, GC..AG or AT..AC on the plus strand, and their reverse complements
CT..AC, CT..GC or GT..AT on the minus strand: six motifs.

Three length bounds apply: span at most 3 Mb, spliced length at least 100 bp, spliced length at most
300 kb.

A single-exon candidate has no junctions, so the canonical test is vacuous for it: it passes
automatically, and its strand cannot be determined this way.

4. Two structural filters
-------------------------
Each is a conjunction, and neither drops on length alone.

Drop a single-exon candidate whose span entirely contains 5 or more distinct junctions witnessed in
the primary reads, each carried by at least 2 reads. Distinct rather than total is what is counted.
The rule is applied at read level, not over assembled transcripts.

Drop a candidate with an intron longer than 50 kb whose exact junction is supported by fewer than 3
primary reads.

5. Candidates to loci
---------------------
Two candidates are placed in the same locus if any of three conditions holds:

  (a) they share at least one identical junction;
  (b) they are on the same chromosome and strand and their genomic spans overlap by at least half of
      the shorter span;
  (c) they are on the same chromosome and strand, their spans overlap, and the POA contiguous-core
      coverage of the shorter exon-sum is at least 0.50.

Condition (c) admits alternative-first-exon and alternative-last-exon isoforms whose junction sets
are disjoint. Apply the three conditions repeatedly until nothing further merges. Conditions (b) and
(c) form a fixed-point loop rather than a single pass, so the result is not order-independent.

The merge produces a set of candidates. The locus that goes forward is one elected member: the
candidate with the most reads, ties broken by the larger span. The locus's chromosome, start, end,
strand and sequence are that member's. The other members contribute their reads to the support count
and are not carried forward.

A locus therefore begins and ends where its best-supported candidate begins and ends. It is not the
union of its members' exons and not their outer envelope. The exon-sum passed to step 6 is one
intron chain, not the locus's full exon repertoire.

The elected candidate can be single-exon even where spliced candidates exist at the same locus,
because the election is on read count. For such a locus the exon-sum is the span.

The read floor in step 2 pools over the connected component of the junction-incidence graph. The
locus here is built by the three conditions above, which include span overlap and POA core. These
are different groupings over the same candidates and they do not coincide in either direction.

6. Loci to the homology graph
-----------------------------
All representatives in the run are written to one FASTA, and that file is passed to minimap2 as both
the target and the query:

    minimap2 -c -X --no-long-join -t <threads> -k 11 -w 5   reps.fa   reps.fa

The comparison is all-vs-all, not one-vs-all, and global rather than per family. There is no
pre-grouping, and families are the output of this step rather than an input to it. The shipped path
is single-tier, at identity 0.60 or above, with -k 11 -w 5 seeding.

An edge requires identity at least 0.60 and coverage at least 0.50 of the shorter sequence, both on
a single alignment record, in the forward orientation.

The minimizer index acts as a prefilter, so most pairs produce no alignment record at all: most
non-edges are "no alignment found" rather than "failed a threshold".

-X implies --dual=no, so each pair is emitted in one direction only, (a,b) or (b,a) but never both.
--dual=no keeps whichever sequence has the lexicographically smaller FASTA header, and the headers
are the representative index, so the query is not necessarily the shorter sequence. Any per-record
statistic must therefore state its axis.

7. Homology graph to final families
-----------------------------------
Take the connected components of the edges.

A connected component is a maximal set of loci in which every locus is reachable from every other by
a chain of edges; maximal means no further locus can be added without breaking that. Every locus
lands in exactly one component, so the components partition the loci.

Membership is therefore transitive. If A-B and B-C are edges, then A, B and C form one component
even when A and C have no edge between them, no measured identity and no alignment record. A
component is held together by chains, not by pairwise resemblance. A single spurious edge merges two
whole components rather than two loci.

Then refine the components.

The refinement in full. For a set of loci S, the induced subgraph is S together with those edges
whose endpoints both lie in S. Its density is

    density(S) = 2m / (n(n-1))

where n is the number of loci in S and m the number of edges in the induced subgraph. The
denominator n(n-1)/2 is the number of possible pairs, so density is the fraction of possible pairs
that are edges: 1.0 if every locus is joined to every other, and near 0 for a long chain.

The rule is: a block of 3 or more loci whose density is below gamma = 0.20 is split, and each part
is tested again, until every surviving block either has 2 or fewer loci or has density at least
gamma. Blocks of 2 or fewer are exempt, because a single edge between 2 loci already gives density
1.0 and the test cannot fail.

The split itself is Louvain community detection on the induced subgraph, run at resolution 1, 2, 4
and 8, taking the first resolution that returns 2 or more communities. If none does, the block is
split into its connected components instead.

The graph the refinement runs on is unweighted: identity and coverage decide whether an edge exists
and are then discarded, so every edge counts the same in the density.

The refinement only ever splits. It starts from the connected components and never merges across
them, and no locus moves between components. This is what makes the output invariant to the order
in which loci are supplied and to the choice of starting locus.

A block that passes the test is a gamma-quasi-clique: a set of loci in which at least gamma of the
possible pairs are edges. Finding a maximum such set is NP-hard, so the block produced here is a
certified witness that a set meets the bar, not a proof that it is the largest set that does.

This step occupies the same position that Markov clustering occupies in TribeMCL, OrthoMCL and
OrthoFinder: it partitions an all-vs-all homology graph into families. Taking the connected
components alone, without it, chains subfamilies together through shared-domain hubs.

Within a block, two loci that overlap on the same strand are merged into one unless at least 3 reads
map uniquely (MAPQ above zero) to one of them, which is the evidence that they are two loci rather
than one counted twice.

Keep the block as a family only if at least 2 distinct loci remain.
